[FEATURE] Create a minimal site package (#189)
TYPO3-Documentation/TYPO3CMS-Tutorial-SitePackage: Documentation/MinimalExample/Index.rst

.. _minimal-design:

====================
Minimal site package
====================

A site package is a custom TYPO3 extension which contains configuration,

> templates, assets etc that are used for the site it belongs to.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
templates, assets, etc that are used for the site it belongs to.
```

> So we first must create a minimal extension.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So first we create a minimal extension.
```

.. _minimal-extension:

Create a minimal TYPO3 extension using b13/make
===============================================

> :composer:`b13/make` is a convenient TYPO3 extension which you can use during

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:composer:`b13/make` is an easy TYPO3 extension which you can use during
```

Author: @sarahmccarthy123 We once where told in a workshop to avoid the word "easy" in the docs as that can frustrate users that ar new and don't find it easy. Can you think of another word I can use here?

Reviewer: Would "simple" work? I just think "convenient" is a bit meaningless in a software context

Author: Simple and easy were both mentioned as words to be avoided in documentation

How about "... is a useful TYPO3 extension that assists you during ..."

development to create a new TYPO3 extension quickly or add functionality to an
existing one.

Use Composer to install it for development only:

..  code-block:: bash

    ddev composer req b13/make --dev

Execute the command `ddev typo3 make:extension` and answer the prompt

..  code-block:: bash

    ddev typo3 make:extension

     Enter the composer package name (e.g. "vendor/awesome"):
     > t3docs/site-package

     Enter the extension key [site_package]:
     >

     Enter the PSR-4 namespace [T3docs/SitePackage]:
     >

     Choose supported TYPO3 versions (comma separate for multiple) [TYPO3 v12 LTS]:
      [10] TYPO3 v10 LTS
      [11] TYPO3 v11 LTS
      [12] TYPO3 v12 LTS
      [13] TYPO3 v13
     > 13

     Enter a description of the extension:
     > My site package

     Where should the extension be created? [src/extensions/]:
     > packages

     May we add a basic service configuration for you? (yes/no) [yes]:
     > no

     May we create a ext_emconf.php for you? (yes/no) [no]:
     >

     [OK] Successfully created the extension my_site_package (myvendor/my-site-package).

> This script created a new folder called `packages` with a subfolder,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This script creates a new folder called `packages` with a subfolder,
```

`my-site-package`. It mainly contains only a file called `composer.json`.

> You could of course also create this file manually. You will learn in step

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You could of course also create this file manually. Step
```

> :ref:`extension-configuration-composer` what the content of the :file:`composer.json`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:ref:`extension-configuration-composer` will explain the content of the :file:`composer.json`.
```

> means. For the time being just remember the Composer name you chose

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the time being just remember the Composer name you have chosen
```

(`t3docs/site-package`) and the extension name (`site_package`).

> Before you see any change in the TYPO3 backend or frontend your site package needs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to see a change in the TYPO3 backend or frontend your site package needs
```

to be :ref:`installed <extension-installation>`.

> After you created your site package extension you can uninstall :composer:`b13/make`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After you have created your site package extension you can uninstall :composer:`b13/make`:
```

..  code-block:: bash

    ddev composer remove b13/make --dev

.. _minimal-extension-siteset:

Create a basic site set
=======================

..  versionadded:: 13.1
    :ref:`Site sets <t3coreapi:site-sets>` have been introduced.

Create a folder called :path:`Configuration/Sets/Minimal/` in the site package
and add a file called :file:`config.yaml` to it. This file contains the
**site set** of your site package:

..  literalinclude:: _config.yaml
    :caption: packages/site-package/Configuration/Sets/Minimal/config.yaml

> You will learn more about site set in chapter

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You will learn more about site sets in chapter
```

:ref:`site_set`.

> You find the complete reference in TYPO3 explained:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can find the complete reference in TYPO3 explained:
```

:ref:`Site sets <t3coreapi:site-sets>`.

Edit the site configuration that was created in step :ref:`typo3-backend-site`
and add the site set to it. You can do this by using the backend module:

..  figure:: AddSiteSet.png
    :alt: Screenshot demonstrating adding the "Minimal example site package" to the site main

    Use module :guilabel:`Site Management > Sites` to add the "Minimal example site package"

> On saving the site package is added to your site configuration file, which changed like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On saving, the site package is added to your site configuration file, which changes to this:
```

..  literalinclude:: _config.yaml.diff

.. _minimal-extension-typoscript:

The TypoScript-only version
===========================

..  versionadded:: 13.1
    A site set can be used as :ref:`TypoScript provider <t3coreapi:site-sets-typoscript>`.

> Put a basic TypoScript configuration in a file called :file:`setup.typoscript`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a file called :file:`setup.typoscript` containing basic TypoScript configuration
```

in the folder of the site set you created in step :ref:`minimal-extension-siteset`:

..  literalinclude:: _minimal.typoscript
    :caption: packages/site-package/Configuration/Sets/Minimal/setup.typoscript

Clear all caches and preview the web page.

You can learn more about the TypoScript syntax used here in chapter
:ref:`A minimal page created by pure TypoScript <t3start:typoscript>`
of the "Getting Started Tutorial".

.. _minimal-extension-fluid:

The TYPO3 Fluid version
=======================

Replace file :file:`setup.typoscript` of example
:file:`minimal-extension-typoscript` with the following lines:

..  literalinclude:: _pageview.typoscript
    :caption: packages/site-package/Configuration/Sets/Minimal/setup.typoscript
    :linenos:

If you preview your page now you would get an error output like:

..  code-block:: html

    Oops, an error occurred! Request: bddd8a816bda3

.. todo: Add information about dealing with errors such as these and link from here.

> This is because the template is not found yet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is because the template has not been found.
```

By searching for the hash `bddd8a816bda3` in the log file you will find such an entry:

..  code-block:: plaintext
    :caption: var/log/typo3_ece44d5005.log
    :emphasize-lines: 7

    Mon, 07 Oct 2024 04:09:44 +0000 [ALERT] request="bddd8a816bda3"
    component="TYPO3.CMS.Frontend.ContentObject.Exception.ProductionExceptionHandler":
    Oops, an error occurred! Request: bddd8a816bda3- InvalidTemplateResourceException:
    Tried resolving a template file for controller action "Default->Pages/Default"
    in format ".html", but none of the paths contained the expected template file
    (Default/Pages/Default.html).
    The following paths were checked: /var/www/html/vendor/t3docs/site-package/Resources/Private/Templates/

> This error message also tells you in which path the file is expected. If no path

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This error message also tells you the path where TYPO3 expects to find the file. If no path
```

> is listed here, the path defined in line 6 of the TypoScript above was not found,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is listed here, the path defined in line 6 of the TypoScript above is incorrect,
```

for example if you mistyped the extension name or part of the path.

Create a file named :file:`Default.html` in folder
:path:`packages/site-package/Resources/Private/Pages`.

.. code-block:: html
   :caption: packages/site-package/Resources/Private/Pages/Default.html

   Hello Fluid World!

Clear all caches and preview the web page.

> You will learn more about using Fluid Templates in chapter :ref:`fluid-templates`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Learn more about using Fluid Templates in chapter :ref:`fluid-templates`.
```
